PEP 746: Type checking Annotated metadata (#3785)
python/peps: peps/pep-0746.rst

In general, the metadata is not meant for static type checkers, but even so,
it is useful to be able to check that the metadata makes sense for the given type.

Take the first example in :pep:`593`, which uses ``Annotated`` to attach
serialization information to a field::

   class Student(struct2.Packed):
       name: Annotated[str, struct2.ctype("<10s")]

Here, the ``struct2.ctype("<10s")`` metadata is meant to be used by a serialization
library to serialize the field. Such libraries can only serialize a subset of types:
it would not make sense to write, for example, ``Annotated[list[str], struct2.ctype("<10s")]``.

Yet the type system provides no way to enforce this. The metadata are completely
ignored by type checkers.

This use case comes up in libraries like :pypi:`pydantic`, which use
``Annotated`` to attach validation and conversion information to fields.

Specification
=============

This PEP introduces a new ``__supports_type__`` protocol that both static and
runtime type checkers can use to understand if a metadata object in
``Annotated`` is valid for the given type. Objects that implement this protocol

> must have a method named ``__supports_type__`` that takes a single positional argument and
> returns a type assignable to ``bool``::

Reviewer: This is using the terms from python/typing#1743 (maybe getting slightly ahead of ourselves). However, I think it's fine to just say it returns ``bool``:
```suggestion
must have a method named ``__supports_type__`` that takes a single positional argument and
returns ``bool``::
```

    class Int64:
        def __supports_type__(self, obj: int) -> bool:
            return isinstance(obj, int)

When a static type checker encounters a type expression of the form ``Annotated[T, M1, M2, ...]``,
it should enforce that for each metadata element in ``M1, M2, ...``, one of the following is true:

* The metadata element evaluates to a type that does not have a ``__supports_type__`` method; or
* The metadata element evaluates to an object ``M`` that has a ``__supports_type__`` method, and
  a call to ``M.__supports_type__(T)`` type checks without errors (i.e., ``T`` is assignable to the

>   parameter type of the ``__supports_type__`` method) and does not evaluate to ``Literal[False]``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  parameter type of the ``__supports_type__`` method), and that call does not
  evaluate to ``Literal[False]``.
```

The body of the ``__supports_type__`` method is not used to check the validity of the metadata

> and static type checkers can ignore it, but tools that use the annotation at runtime may call the
> method to check that a particular value is valid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and static type checkers can ignore it. However, tools that use the annotation at
runtime may call the method to check that a particular value is valid.
```

For example, to support a generic ``Gt`` metadata, one might write::

    from typing import Protocol

    class SupportsGt[T](Protocol):
        def __gt__(self, __other: T) -> bool:
            ...

    class Gt[T]:
        def __init__(self, value: T) -> None:
            self.value = value

        def __supports_type__(self, obj: SupportsGt[T]) -> bool:
            return obj > self.value

    x1: Annotated[int, Gt(0)] = 1  # OK
    x2: Annotated[str, Gt(0)] = 0  # type checker error: str is not assignable to SupportsGt[int]
    x3: Annotated[int, Gt(1)] = 0  # OK for static type checkers; runtime type checkers may flag this

Implementations may be generic and may use overloads that return ``Literal[True]`` or ``Literal[False]``
to indicate if the metadata is valid for the given type.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Metadata that does not implement the protocol will be considered valid for all types,
so no breaking changes are introduced for existing code. The new checks only apply
to metadata objects that explicitly implement the protocol specified by this PEP.

Security Implications
=====================

None.

How to Teach This
=================

> This protocol is intended mostly for libraries that provide ``Annotated`` metadata
> and end users of those libraries are unlikely to need to implement the protocol themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This protocol is intended mostly for libraries that provide ``Annotated`` metadata;
end users of those libraries are unlikely to need to implement the protocol themselves.
```

Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-746-typedmetadata-for-type-checking-of-pep-593-annotated/53834
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 20-May-2024
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: 20-May-2024

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a mechanism for type checking metadata that uses
the :py:data:`typing.Annotated` type. Metadata objects that implement
the new ``__supports_type__`` protocol will be type checked by static
type checkers to ensure that the metadata is valid for the given type.

Motivation
==========

:pep:`593` introduced ``Annotated`` as a way to attach runtime metadata to types.
In general, the metadata is not meant for static type checkers, but even so,
it is often useful to be able to check that the metadata makes sense for the given
type.

Take the first example in :pep:`593`, which uses ``Annotated`` to attach
serialization information to a field::

   class Student(struct2.Packed):
       name: Annotated[str, struct2.ctype("<10s")]

Here, the ``struct2.ctype("<10s")`` metadata is meant to be used by a serialization
library to serialize the field. Such libraries can only serialize a subset of types:

> it would not make sense to write, for example, ``Annotated[list[str], struct2.ctype("<10s")]``.

Reviewer: Aren't those really the same thing? The metadata is meant to match the behavior of the serialization library.

> it would not make sense to write, for example, ``Annotated[list[str], struct2.ctype("<10s")]``.

Reviewer 3: I suppose so! Makes sense!

Yet the type system provides no way to enforce this. The metadata are completely
ignored by type checkers.

This use case comes up in libraries like :pypi:`pydantic`, which use
``Annotated`` to attach validation and conversion information to fields.

Specification
=============

> This PEP introduces a new ``__supports_type__`` protocol that both static and

Reviewer 4: It's a bit confusing to refer to this as a `__supports_type__` protocol. 

Here's a possible rewording: "This PEP introduces a protocol that can be used by static and runtime type checkers to validate the consistency between `Annotated` metadata and a given type.

runtime type checkers can use to understand if a metadata object in
``Annotated`` is valid for the given type. Objects that implement this protocol

> must have a method named ``__supports_type__`` that takes a single positional argument and

Reviewer 4: "a single positional argument" => If the protocol requires a positional argument, then the parameter should be marked positional-only in the protocol definition. That is, the signature should include a `, /` at the end to indicate that `obj` is positional-only.

returns ``bool``::

    class Int64:
        def __supports_type__(self, obj: int) -> bool:
            return isinstance(obj, int)

When a static type checker encounters a type expression of the form ``Annotated[T, M1, M2, ...]``,
it should enforce that for each metadata element in ``M1, M2, ...``, one of the following is true:

* The metadata element evaluates to a type that does not have a ``__supports_type__`` method; or
* The metadata element evaluates to an object ``M`` that has a ``__supports_type__`` method, and
  a call to ``M.__supports_type__(T)`` type checks without errors (i.e., ``T`` is assignable to the
  parameter type of the ``__supports_type__`` method), and that call does not

>   evaluate to ``Literal[False]``.

Reviewer 5: What happens if `__supports_type__` is defined, but left untyped (in particular the return type is omitted)? As pyright tries to infer untyped bodies:

```python
from typing import Any

class Meta:
    def __supports_type__(self, obj: str):
        return False

reveal_type(Meta().__supports_type__(""))  # Type of "Meta().__supports_type__("")" is "Literal[False]"

class Model:
    # Should this be flagged as an error, as `__supports_type__` returns `Literal[False]`?
    foo: Annotated[str, Meta("some_string")]
```

Probably it should be stated that a defined `__supports_type__` but untyped should be ignored?
---

On a side note, I think the following sentence:

> (i.e., ``T`` is assignable to the parameter type of the ``__supports_type__`` method)

is slightly incorrect, as `T` is a type, not a variable, so a type can't be assigned to a parameter type.

(I might be wrong here, please correct me if necessary).

Reviewer: It's up to what type checkers infer, similar to any untyped function. However, I'd be OK with omitting the `Literal[False]` special case for simplicity; @adriangb do you think it's important?

I think this usage of "assignable to" is correct under the definitions in python/typing#1743 that we'll likely adopt soon.

Author: I think the untyped function is a good case to bring up but in practice I think it won't matter since the implementers will be mostly libraries which I would expect will either fully type their metadata or consider the behavior a bug on their end.

Reviewer 5: Yes, doesn't make really much sense to not type such a method meant for type checking indeed. So I guess the fallback to what type checkers infer is fine!

>   evaluate to ``Literal[False]``.

Reviewer 5: What happens if `__supports_type__` is defined, but left untyped (in particular the return type is omitted)? As pyright tries to infer untyped bodies:

```python
from typing import Any

class Meta:
    def __supports_type__(self, obj: str):
        return False

reveal_type(Meta().__supports_type__(""))  # Type of "Meta().__supports_type__("")" is "Literal[False]"

class Model:
    # Should this be flagged as an error, as `__supports_type__` returns `Literal[False]`?
    foo: Annotated[str, Meta("some_string")]
```

PEP: 746
Title: TypedMetadata for type checking of PEP 593 Annotated
Author: Adrian Garcia Badaracco <adrian@adriangb.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/XYZ

Reviewer 6: Let's leave this out for now to keep the linter happy. When we merge the PR, create the discussion, and create a small PR to update the link.

```suggestion
```

Author: ```suggestion
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-746-typedmetadata-for-type-checking-of-pep-593-annotated
```

Author: Thank you for all of your help @hugovk!

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-746-typedmetadata-for-type-checking-of-pep-593-annotated

Author: ```suggestion
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-746-typedmetadata-for-type-checking-of-pep-593-annotated/53834
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 20-May-2024
Python-Version: 3.13
Post-History: 20-May-2024

Abstract
--------

This PEP proposes a mechanism for integrating metadata in the :pep:`593` ``Annotated`` type
into the type system.

Motivation
----------

:pep:`593` introduced ``Annotated`` as a way to attach runtime metadata to types,
however it does not provide any way to tie the metadata to the type itself.
This can introduce type unsoundness in real world usage, even in examples similar
to those in the PEP.
For example, given a metadata like ``Int64()`` that might instruct how to serialize a field
over the wire, one can write ``Annotated[float, Int64()]`` which is clearly unsound
and could be type checked, but there is currently no mechanism to do so.

Runtime type checking libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the core desires for :pep:`593` was to allow better integration with runtime
uses of types. It proposed a use case similar to the above ``Int64`` example. However,
it has become clear that one of the most popular use cases for typing in Python is runtime

> type checking, as provided by libraries like `pydantic <pydantic_>`_ and `msgspec <msgspec>`_.

Reviewer 6: We can fix the "Duplicate explicit target name" errors and simplify these links (because the name and target are the same) like this:

```suggestion
type checking, as provided by libraries like `pydantic`_ and `msgspec`_.
```

Pydantic in particular is one of the most popular libraries in the Python ecosystem, and is

> in fact downloaded more than type checkers like `mypy <mypy_>`_.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
in fact downloaded more than type checkers like `mypy`_.
```

        def transform[NewOut](self, func: Callable[[Out], NewOut]) -> Validate[In, NewOut]: ...
    
    parse = Validate().parse  # note that Out is unsubstituted

    # okay
    Annotated[int, Int64()]

    # error
    Annotated[float, Int64()]

    # okay, Validate[Any, str] is explicitly created and str.lower(str) is valid
    Annotated[str, parse(str).transform(str.lower)]

    # error, Validate[Any, str] is explicitly created and str / 1 is invalid
    Annotated[str, parse(str).transform(lambda x: x / 1)]

    # okay, Validate[Any, float] is inferred because type parameter is not substituted
    Annotated[float, parse().transform(lambda x: x / 1)]

    # error, float is inferred and str.lower does not work on float
    Annotated[float, parse().transform(str.lower)]

Reference Implementation
========================

Type checkers should support type checking metadata in ``Annotated`` and they should
follow the behavior that if ``TypedMetadata`` is un-parameterized then it's type parameter
should take the value of the type in ``Annotated``.
All type checkers should support type checking metadata in ``Annotated``.

> As of writing only `pyright <pyright>`_ does.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
As of writing only `pyright`_ does.
```

PEP: 746
Title: TypedMetadata for type checking of PEP 593 Annotated
Author: Adrian Garcia Badaracco <adrian@adriangb.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-746-typedmetadata-for-type-checking-of-pep-593-annotated/53834
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 20-May-2024

> Python-Version: 3.13

Reviewer 6: [Python 3.13](https://peps.python.org/pep-0719/) has entered feature freeze so let's target 3.14:

```suggestion
Python-Version: 3.14
```

Post-History: 20-May-2024

Abstract
--------

This PEP proposes a mechanism for integrating metadata in the :pep:`593` ``Annotated`` type
into the type system.

Motivation
----------

:pep:`593` introduced ``Annotated`` as a way to attach runtime metadata to types,
however it does not provide any way to tie the metadata to the type itself.
This can introduce type unsoundness in real world usage, even in examples similar
to those in the PEP.

For example, given a metadata like ``Int64()`` that might instruct how to serialize a field
over the wire, one can write ``Annotated[float, Int64()]`` which is clearly unsound
and could be type checked, but there is currently no mechanism to do so.

Specification
-------------

This PEP introduces a new ``__supports_type__`` protocol that both static and
runtime type checkers can use to understand if a metadata object in
``Annotated`` is valid for a given type::

    class Int64:

>         def __supports_type__(self, tp: type[int]) -> bool:

Reviewer: I don't think the `type[]` argument makes sense.

this protocol.

Implementations may be generic, use overloads and return ``Literal[True]`` or ``Literal[False]``
to indicate if the metadata is valid for the given type.

For example, to support a generic ``Gt`` metadata you might do::

    from typing import Protocol

    class SupportsGt[T](Protocol):
        def __gt__(self, __other: T) -> bool:
            ...

    class Gt[T]:
        def __init__(self, value: T) -> None:
            self.value = value

        def __supports_type__(self, t: type[SupportsGt[T]]) -> bool:
            return isinstance(self.value, t)

    Gt(1).__supports_type__(int)  # okay
    Gt(1).__supports_type__(str)  # error
    Gt('a').__supports_type__(str)  # okay
    Gt('a').__supports_type__(int)  # error

Metadata that does not implement the protocol will be considered valid for all types,
thus no breaking changes are introduced even at type-checking time.

Rejected ideas
--------------

Introducing a type variable instead of a generic class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Introducing a type variable such as ``AnnotatedT = TypeVar('AnnotatedT')`` would require

> using the old type variable syntax (pre :pep:`695`) which may eventually be removed from the language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the old type variable syntax (pre :pep:`695`), which is now a discouraged part of the language.
```

Introducing a new type to ``typing.py`` that all metadata objects should subclass
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This would require adding a type to the already large ``typing.py`` module and would

> require a backport via ``typing_extensions`` for older versions of Python.

Reviewer: These aren't very strong arguments; we add things to typing and typing_extensions all the time. I would remove this sentence and try to make the argument in the paragraph below more concrete. What kind of complex use cases would not work?

Another strong argument is that a protocol is more Pythonic than a marker base class: Python frequently uses protocols but never marker base classes.
